let's dive straight in with our main
story tonight which concerns the subject
that has dominated the news all week
global hot zones the corona virus
spreading fears grow of a global
pandemic a huge spike in cases in Italy
hundreds of cases in South Korea new
cases reported in Europe that the CDC
warned Americans to be prepared here at
home that it's not a matter of if but
when yes
the corona virus on Tuesday the CDC said
that it's spreading here is not a
question of if but when which is just
not a comforting thing to hear about the
spread of something deadly it's only
comforting if you're talking about
whether Saoirse Ronan will win an Oscar
or whether Henry Kissinger will ever die
don't worry it's not a question of if
but when and the CDC were not wrong
there are now several dozen confirmed
cases here in the United States with the
first death coming just yesterday
meanwhile the stock market has taken its
biggest one-week dive since 2008 and
many Americans have questions about how
to stay safe joy Johnson emailed us
asking can I get coronavirus from a
package being delivered from China
that's a great question talk about these
masks do we get them or don't we some
people are wondering if you can protect
yourself from the virus by gardling with
bleach we're taking steroids can you get
the corona virus by eating Chinese food
of course you can't get the corona virus
from eating Chinese food in fact if
you're eating at a Panda Express you
can't even get Chinese food by eating
Chinese food although I will say this
you are unlikely to get the corona virus
if you regularly gargle bleach because
you know what they say being dead is
already the best medicine look it might
be helpful to get the very basics down
here straight away what we're talking
about is a sickness called Co vid 19
caused by a new strain of corona virus
symptoms include fever cough and
shortness of breath and preliminary
estimates are that it has around a two
percent mortality rate with the elderly
and those with pre-existing conditions
most at risk and I know some people
don't seem to think that 2 percent is
all that bad as Chuck Todd told us in
the weirdest possible way
so last night I surprised my teenager
when I told him that only 2% of those
that get this coronavirus die he goes oh
well I thought it was I thought it was
much worse and I understand if you just
digest social media you just digest the
headlines this feels more deadly than it
is okay so first on behalf of your
teenager dad get out of my room and stop
telling me the news but second 2% of
people is a lot when you're talking
about those people dying think about it
this way two percent of people
disappearing was literally the premise
of the leftovers you know the show whose
pilots very much did not consist of
Justin Theroux going well that was rough
but to be honest could have been worse
and then the show ended the fact is a 2%
mortality rate if true would be about 20
times higher than the seasonal flu and
while the good news is around 80% of
those who get this virus have mild
symptoms the bad news is that means they
are more likely to spread it without
even realizing that is one of the things
that makes this so dangerous and why
even though is mortality rate is much
lower than that of SARS or MERS this
virus has already killed three times as
many people in fact one expert has
predicted that 40 to 70% of the world's
population will be infected within the
next year which is incredibly upsetting
because there's only one infectious
disease that two-thirds of the world
should be getting right now and that's
Adam driver fever shatter my knees you
redwood
snap off my toes you big unwashed
Buffalo so if the stock market is
tanking and people are considering
gargling bleach we thought tonight might
be a good time to talk about the corona
virus how we got to this point what's
currently being done and how this virus
has exposed governmental vulnerabilities
as it has spread around the world and
let's start with how all of this began
the first documented cases cropped up at
the end of last year in Wuhan China and
initially the Chinese government wasn't
just slow to respond officials tried to
silence and punish medical professionals
who tried to raise the alarm which
almost certainly helped the disease to
spread and when the Chinese leadership
finally decided to act it moved
aggressively putting nearly 50 million
people on lockdown
one month after Wuhan sealed off its
borders its roads are empty and
construction sites are abandoned
residents had been permitted to leave
their residential compounds once every
seven days but this week loudspeakers
placed on street corners notified
households of a change from now on
nobody can go out holy a talking
box that tells you you can't leave your
house feels pretty dystopian to be
honest not much prefer our dystopia
we're a talking box listen to all our
conversations and then tells jeff bezos
when i'll need underwear next it's such
a convenient way to give up for
everything people on lockdown in China
are in a very unpleasant situation but
they've been doing their best to try and
amuse themselves like this man who
either improvised a cool mask or found
finally found a socially acceptable
reason to indulge in a very specific
fetish other citizens made makeshift
hazmat suits out of inflatable Christmas
tree and dinosaur costumes while still
others stuck indoors or reduced to
creating their own entertainment like
playing snooker with chopsticks and
cherry tomatoes
look I have to say that is the most
culinary resourcefulness that I've seen
since Claire from Bon Apetit s kitchen
made compost from scratch I don't know
why you do this to yourself Claire they
sell them in stores but but despite the
government efforts at containment over
2,700 people have now died in China
among them dr. Lee when Lee Ann an early
whistleblower silenced by officials who
has since become a symbol for citizens
anger at their government's response so
that is how this all began and the
coronavirus has since spread to more
than 60 other countries who've handled
it with varying degrees of success
Vietnam for instance moved quickly and
among other things produce this
incredible public information video
about how to limit its spread through
proper hygiene
[Music]
yes yes yes yes
Vietnam made a song about washing your
hands to prevent coronavirus infection
and it absolutely slaps that's a genuine
club banger right there in fact people
like that song so much it even became a
tick-tock dance challenge
the songs incredible it makes all other
songs about washing yourself look like
trash and I'm I'm talking to you here
Ernie look you've been on top of the
pile for a long time but you got
complacent didn't you and while other
artists were out there innovating you
kept singing the same old ducky song you
lost the hunger Sun you fell asleep at
the wheel and music moved on without you
look not all countries have responded
quite as well Japan famously botched its
handling of the cruise ship diamond
princess by quarantine II more than
3,500 passengers and crew on the ship
itself which had disastrous results more
than 620 cases have been confirmed among
the passengers and crew on the cruise
ship raising worries about how the virus
was able to spread so rapidly among
people who should have been isolated oh
I'll tell you how it spread so rapidly
they were on a cruise ship under the
best of circumstances a cruise ship is a
floating petri dish you might as well
have held them in a Chucky Cheese ball
pit the spread was so bad that seven
passengers have since died and the WH
o--'s list of coronavirus cases by
country actually had a separate line
just for the diamond princess which is
terrifying although again in terms of
cruises still not the worst if your
options are the diamond princess or the
actual Carnival Cruise where the toilets
were so full of they were falling
off the walls I'm booking the SS
coronavirus ten times out of ten ten out
of ten and in some countries the
response was handled so badly you could
watch the virus spread live on
television in Iran a government
spokesperson attempting to reassure
people that the virus was under control
while the deputy Health Minister
standing next to him started mopping
away fever sweat like an Alabama
preacher that that guy was later
confirmed to have the corona virus
although not before going on TV again
to explain away his symptoms while
coughing all over the studio
and if that wasn't bad enough which it
is it turns out the Iranian people
now trust their government so little
they think he was staging the whole
thing they say they were lying that they
have Corona but they wanted to this is a
propaganda it's not got it no no they
say that he's lying and in three days
he's gonna come out to say that I owe
you see I'm recovered it's not serious
don't worry the level of mistrust
towards Iranian politicians is so deep
that they wouldn't believe anything that
comes out of their mouth right Iranians
won't believe anything that comes out of
their politicians mouths even if that
thing is the actual coronavirus and that
is a huge problem because it is going to
be hard for any government to give
effective advice if people don't believe
in them you know trust in institutions
is critical when trying to contain a
possible pandemic and unfortunately that
brings us to the United States response
to this virus and specifically to this
guy because the White House is messaging
has been all over the place this week in
fact on Tuesday the very same day that
the CDC said that the spread of corona
virus in the United States was not a
question of if but when one of trumps
top advisors was on TV saying this we
have contained this we have contained
this I won't say airtight that pretty
close to airtight well which is it
because airtight versus close to
airtight is a pretty crucial distinction
it's the difference between having a
working submarine and a cool metal tube
to die in and the dissonance there
speaks to a real problem because it in a
global health emergency you want to hear
from the many trained experts who were
lucky enough to have working in our
nation's public health agencies you do
not want to hear from politicians and
yet on Wednesday the president had a
surprise announcement President Trump
alongside his top health advisors sought
to calm a nervous nation naming a new
point person to lead the
administration's response I'm gonna be
putting our Vice
mic Benson charge he's got a certain
talent for this does either because I
was under the impression the only things
pence have a certain talent for were
avoiding off-leash women sucking up to
people who represent the antithesis of
everything he claims to believe in and
miserably failure pulling off a haircut
known as the Judi Dench putting aside
pencils to put it mildly extremely mixed
record as governor of Indiana on
managing public health issues even the
announcement that he would be leading
the task force was a debacle
because Alex a czar the Secretary of
Health and Human Services was already
supposed to be chairing that task force
and Trump didn't seem interested in
clarifying their roles or indeed really
being there at all I'm still chairman of
the task force so not in the least I'm
with the program when this was mentioned
to me I said I was delighted that I get
to have the vice president helping in
this way delighted yeah he just left
this was a press conference meant to
calm the nation and with the most basic
question of who would be running things
seemingly up in the air he just
right off I know we used to only see
businessman Trump but it is nice to
occasionally get a glimpse of the
absentee father in him too it is more
than just a lack of leadership
it is also concerning that Trump's main
focus when discussing this virus seems
to be downplaying any potentially bad
news he started this week tweeting the
corona virus is very much under control
but there was no way to be sure of that
as he frankly should have known many of
the test kits the CDC initially
developed to detect the virus apparently
didn't work as expected meaning that as
recently as Wednesday the CDC and only
six state labs were testing for the
virus thankfully that has since been
fixed and we're presumably going to find
more cases now but but Trump seemed too
reluctant to admit that that will happen
in
you can watch that dynamic in real time
as officials at the press conference say
one thing and he tries to massage it
into something else we can expect to see
more cases in the United States we do
expect more cases when you have 15
people and the 15 within a couple of
days it's going to be down to close to
zero that's a pretty good job we've done
yep but it won't be close to zero will
it your experts just said cases will go
up and you said they will go down you
can't just ignore real numbers and make
up ones that you like better
this is the problem with a president
whose entire life has been a series of
low stakes lies a man it was lying about
among other things his net worth his
apprentice ratings at the number of
flaws in Trump Tower the size of
electoral college victory the attendance
at his rallies whether it rained at his
inaugural and even whether or not he was
invited on this very boring and low
rated show which he doesn't like about
something that means literally nothing
and lying about the spread of a deadly
disease and that is not the only time
the Trump has peddled false hope if you
seem to speak on this virus at all
lately you may have seen him repeatedly
reassure everyone that there was a
chance the end of the outbreak is just
around the corner there's a theory that
in April when it gets warm historically
that has been able to kill the virus you
know a lot of people think that goes
away in April with the heat as the heat
comes you know in April supposedly it
dies with a hotter weather and that's a
beautiful day to look forward to
it's up first never call calendar dates
beautiful I don't know I don't know how
he did it but I'm pretty sure Trump just
sexually harassed the month of April the
second again the truth is much more
complicated there because yes some
viruses do recede in warmer months and
yes history's worst flu pandemic in 1918
did ever way over the summer but it is
worth knowing that come the fall the
virus returned was far more severe and
ended up killing nearly 200,000
Americans in October alone this is a bad
time to have a president who cannot
speak clearly because there's already
enough bad information flying around and
the president's favorite channel has
been a particular offender here Fox
anchors and guests have repeatedly
amplified false claims from the idea
that the virus was created in a Chinese
bioweapons lab - the baseless internet
rumor that it came from Chinese people
eating bat soup which one commentator
used as an excuse to say how he really
feels bat soup may be delicious
to certain people but unfortunately bats
are the world's greatest reservoir for
viruses what are we gonna do about China
what are we gonna do about a
totalitarian dictatorship where it's
okay to sell live virus infected bats in
open-air market places and then have
business travel and tourists travel
between that country and the civilized
world that escalated quickly he really
moves from the vaguely dog whistling
what are we going to do about China all
the way - it's not part of the civilized
world
at lightning speed truly that man is the
Usain Bolt of racism a comparison I'm
certain he absolutely hates
it gets worse because some people are
even clearly trying to profit off the
present panic like televangelist Jim
Baker who has a cure that he'd love to
sell you would you recommend is a doctor
people to have silver in their house for
it you never want to be without silver
you're saying that Silver's solution
would be effective well let's say it
hasn't been tested on this strain of the
corona virus but it's been tested on
other stranger on of the corona virus
and has been able to eliminate it within
12 hours yeah totally dominate it kills
it and deactivates it okay that is
ridiculous silver does not kill
coronavirus silver kills werewolves
which means first you need to get your
coronavirus bitten by a microscopic
wealth and where am I going to find one
of those in this economy well that's
right from our online store for just
$49.99 we will send you John Oliver's
premium work solution it contains
millions of microscopic world's ready to
spread their bestial curse to your
coronavirus and then you can use the
silver solution which is based on the
exact same amount of science the truth
is the truth is while clinic while
clinical trials are underway there is no
treatment for the corona virus at the
moment and a vaccine could take between
a year and 18 months to develop and at
this point you may be wondering how
scared should you be and the answer is
probably a bit a bit look I don't want
to be alarmist here but I also don't
want to minimize what we could be facing
it's really about trying to strike a
sensible balance basically if you're
drinking bleach to protect yourself
right now
you should probably calm the down
if you are say licking subway poles
because you're certain nothing can hurt
you
maybe don't do that you want to stay
somewhere between those extremes don't
be complacent and don't be a
idiot and look as a practical matter
until experts advise that this threat is
over we should all be following some
basic advice first don't be racist
that's just good general advice for now
so don't hold masks what I understand
that you might want to do that you are
potentially taking away those masks from
the people who really need them health
care providers and those who are sick
three check the CDC website for future
updates because they could have
additional guidance as this develops and
finally and this is more important than
it might sound wash your hands regularly
for at least 20 seconds and I know that
that last lesson is boring and easy to
forget but luckily we now know that
there is a way to ensure that it
absolutely never leaves your head hit
[Applause]